TOPIC: Cuts and Scrapes
SOURCE: MedlinePlus
URL: https://medlineplus.gov/firstaid.html
CATEGORY: Common Symptom
DATE: 2026-01-25

SECTION TITLE: Summary
Accidents happen. Someone chokes on an ice cube or gets stung by a bee. It is important to know when to call 911 -- it is for life-threatening emergencies. While waiting for help to arrive, you may be able to save someone's life. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( CPR ) is for people whose hearts or breathing has stopped and the Heimlich maneuver is for people who are choking. You can also learn to handle common injuries and wounds . Cuts and scrapes, for example, should be rinsed with cool water. To stop bleeding, apply firm but gentle pressure, using gauze. If blood soaks through, add more gauze, keeping the first layer in place. Continue to apply pressure. It is important to have a first aid kit available. Keep one at home and one in your car. It should include a first-aid guide. Read the guide to learn how to use the items, so you are ready in case an emergency happens.

SECTION TITLE: Start Here
ER101 (American College of Emergency Physicians) First Aid and Safety (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish First-Aid Kits: Stock Supplies That Can Save Lives (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish Know When to Go to the ER (American College of Emergency Physicians) Also in Spanish

SECTION TITLE: Specifics
Anaphylaxis: First Aid (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR): First Aid (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish Choking: First Aid (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish Electrical Burns: First Aid (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish Foreign Object in the Nose: First Aid (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Foreign Object in the Skin: First Aid (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Frostbite: First Aid (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish Head Trauma: First Aid (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish Heart Attack: First Aid (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Heat Exhaustion and Heat Stroke (American Academy of Family Physicians) Hiking and Backpacking First Aid Kit: Contents and Checklist (American Red Cross) Nosebleeds (American Academy of Family Physicians) Seizures (For Parents) (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish Shock: First Aid (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research) Also in Spanish Unconsciousness, First Aid (VisualDX) What Do I Need in My First Aid Kit? (American Academy of Family Physicians)

SECTION TITLE: Journal Articles References and abstracts from MEDLINE/PubMed (National Library of Medicine)
Article: Evaluation of the Effectiveness of Psychological First Aid Training for Community... Article: 'Being empathetic to my patients and ourselves': a qualitative process evaluation... Article: Drama-based simulations in first aid education: psychometric validation of a student... First Aid -- see more articles

SECTION TITLE: Children
First Aid Tips (National Eye Institute) How to Handle a Medical Emergency (For Kids) (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish Teaching Your Child How to Use 911 (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish Teeth Injuries: First Aid (For Parents) (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish What You Need to Know in an Emergency (For Parents) (Nemours Foundation) Also in Spanish

SECTION TITLE: Patient Handouts
Bleeding (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish Lacerations - liquid bandage (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish Poisoning first aid (Medical Encyclopedia) Also in Spanish

