TOPIC: Meningitis
SOURCE: NHS
URL: https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/meningitis/
CATEGORY: Edge Case
DATE: 2026-03-18

SECTION TITLE: Overview - Meningitis
Meningitis is an infection of the protective membranes that surround the brain and spinal cord (meninges). It can affect anyone, but is most common in babies, young children, teenagers and young adults. Meningitis can be very serious if not treated quickly. It can cause life-threatening sepsis and result in permanent damage to the brain or nerves. A number of vaccinations are available that offer some protection against meningitis.

SECTION TITLE: Important: Meningitis outbreak
The overall risk of Meningitis B (MenB) to people outside the Kent area remains low. If you have symptoms of meningitis, call 999 or go to A&E straight away. If someone goes to bed unwell, check on them regularly. Find out more about the Meningitis outbreak from the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA)

SECTION TITLE: Symptoms of meningitis
Symptoms of meningitis develop suddenly and can include: a high temperature (fever) being sick a headache a rash that does not fade when a glass is rolled over it (but a rash will not always develop) a stiff neck a dislike of bright lights drowsiness or unresponsiveness seizures (fits) These symptoms can appear in any order. You do not always get all the symptoms. Find out more about the symptoms of meningitis

SECTION TITLE: When to get medical help
Call 999 for an ambulance or go to your nearest A&E immediately if you think you or someone you look after could have meningitis or sepsis. Trust your instincts and do not wait for all the symptoms to appear or until a rash develops. Someone with meningitis or sepsis can become very unwell very quickly. If you're not sure if your symptoms are serious, use NHS 111 online or call 111 to find out what to do. If you've had medical advice and are still worried or any symptoms get worse, get medical help again.

SECTION TITLE: How meningitis is spread
Meningitis is usually caused by a bacterial or viral infection. Bacterial meningitis is rarer but more serious than viral meningitis. The viruses and bacteria that cause meningitis can be spread through close contact with a person who has them. This can include: contact with the person's spit, such as kissing them, or sharing drinks or vapes being in close contact with the person for a lot of time, such as living in the same home Meningitis is usually caught from people who carry these viruses or bacteria in their nose or throat but are not ill themselves. It can also be caught from someone with meningitis, but this is less common.

SECTION TITLE: Vaccinations against meningitis
Vaccinations offer some protection against certain causes of meningitis. These include the: MenB vaccine – offered to babies aged 8 weeks, followed by a second dose at 12 weeks and a booster at 1 year 6-in-1 vaccine – offered to children at 8 weeks, 12 weeks, 16 weeks and 18 months pneumococcal vaccine – 2 doses offered to babies at 16 weeks and 1 year, and a single dose offered to adults aged 65 or over MMRV vaccine – offered to children at 12 months and 18 months MenACWY vaccine – offered to teenagers, sixth formers and "fresher" students going to university for the first time

SECTION TITLE: Treatments for meningitis
People with suspected meningitis will usually have tests in hospital to confirm the diagnosis and check whether the condition is the result of a viral or bacterial infection. Bacterial meningitis usually needs to be treated in hospital for at least a week. Treatments include: antibiotics given directly into a vein fluids given directly into a vein oxygen through a face mask Viral meningitis tends to get better on its own within 7 to 10 days and can often be treated at home. Getting plenty of rest and taking painkillers and anti-sickness medication can help relieve the symptoms in the meantime.

SECTION TITLE: Outlook for meningitis
Viral meningitis will usually get better on its own and rarely causes any long-term problems. Most people with bacterial meningitis who are treated quickly will also make a full recovery, although some are left with serious long-term problems. These can include: hearing loss or vision loss , which may be partial or total problems with memory and concentration recurrent seizures ( epilepsy ) co-ordination, movement and balance problems loss of limbs – amputation of affected limbs is sometimes necessary Overall, it's estimated up to 1 in every 10 cases of bacterial meningitis is fatal. Find out more about the complications of meningitis Page last reviewed: 18 March 2026 Next review due: 17 March 2027

